# Douglas CrockFord - Javascript The Programming Language

## Intro

most used language and the most misunderstood language
functional language
DOM - most hostile programming environment

all keywords are lower case. Language is case sensitive.

## Recommended Book
David Flannagan's the definitive guide

## History
<dl>

<dt> 1992 </dt>
<dd>
- Jim Gosling - create - successor to c++. working title - c++ plus plus. later named it as oak named after oak tree. <br/>
- Used OAK at First Person - technology for interactive telivision application - failure <br/>
- Gosling rolls back to Sun </br>
- Failure Reason - deduced - Gosling renamed the language to Java <br/>
- To demonstrate Java - WebBrowser (HotJava) - popular <br/>
</dd>

<dt> 1995 </dt>
<dd>
- HotJava - famous <br>
- LiveScript, created in 10 days by Brendan Eich at Netscape - initial idea to use schema - rejected<br>
  - Needed a much light weight language - result LiveScript - first scripting language to be put in browser and server <br>
- Alliance of Netscape and Sun (to move world away from microsoft's dominance) <br>
- sun wanted Java to be language of the browser <br>
- Netscape argued it doesn't work for browsers <br>
- Founder of Netscape - changed name of liveScript  to Javascript <br>
- Sun claimed trademark ownership of javascript. <br>
</dd>

<dt> 1996 </dt>
<dd>
- reverse engineered javascript. <br>
- Jscript at Microsoft. <br>
- not wanting to deal with sun's trademark it named it as Jscript. <br>
- similarly J++ instead of Java. <br>
</dd>

<dt> 1998 </dt>
<dd>
- ECMAScript <br>
- the alliance found Microsoft making copy of Javascript but named it differently. <br>
- To prevent Microsoft from mutating the language too much. They went to ECMA <br>
- Netscape lost control of standards for the language <br>
- Microsoft dictated the standards <br>
</dd>

</dl>

## Key Ideas
- load and go delivery - programs delivered as source code (text)
- loose typing
- objects as general containers ( unification of objects and hash )
- Prototypal inherintance ( inherting directly from objects )
- lamda - functions as first class objects
- linkage through global namespace

## Values / Types
- Numbers
- Strings
- Booleans
- Objects
- null
- undefined

## Numbers
- only one number type (no integers)
- 64 bit floating point
- IEEE-754 (aka "Double")
- Does not map well to common understanding of arithmatic

### NaN
- Special Number - Not a Number.
- Result of undefined or erroneous operations
- Toxic: any arithmetic operation with NaN as an input will have NaN as a result
- NaN not equal to anything (including NaN itself)
(i.e) NaN == NaN (false)

### Number functions
```
Number(value)
```
- gives number if string can be parsed as integer.
- else NaN

```
parseInt(value,10)
```
- converts the value to number
- it stops at the first non-digit character
- always use radix i.e number system specifier. as parseInt("08") => 0. taken as octal

### Math object

## String
- ucs2 char code system
- strings are immutable
- similar strings are equal
- length property.
- String function - to convert number to string
- Strign is an object - so it has lots of methods

## null : a value that's not anything

## undefined : default value when value is not assigned.

## Booleans : true and false

### Falsy values:
- false
- null
- undefined
- "" (empty string)
- 0
- NaN

### Truthy Values:
- all other values (including all objects) are truthy
eg : "0" "false" {}

## Dynamic Objects:
- unification of Objects and Hashtable
- new Object() produces an empty container of name/value pairs
- name can be any string, a value can be any value except undefined
- members can be accessed with do notation or subscript notation
- No hash nature is visible (no hash codes or rehash methods)

## Loosely Typed Language:
- any of these types can be stored in an variable, or passed as a parameter to any function
- the language is not "untyped". Only the variables are untyped

## Syntax:
- JS is syntactically a C family language
- It differs from C mainly in its type system, which allows functions to be values.

## Identifiers (names)
- case sensitive
- starts with a letter or _ or $
- ..
- followed by zero or more letters, digits, _ or $
- By convention all variables, parameters, members and function names start with lower case
- ..
- Except for constructors which start with upper case
- Initial _ should be reserved for implementations
- ..
- $ should be reserved for machines
- macro processors, program generators

## Comments
```
//single line comment
```

```
/* multi line comment
 *
 *
 */
```

## Operators:

### +

- if a string is found in expression it will be concatenated instead of adding numbers (coercion)
- == and !=
- does type coercion
- === and !== for exact equality


### &&

- the guard operator aka logical 'and'
- return the first falsy value or the last truthy value.

```
myObject && myObject.member
```

### ||

- the logical OR
- returns first truthy value or last falsy value
- used for setting default values

```
var myVal = passedParameter || 'defaultValue';
```

### !

- Logical not operator
- If truthy  - returns  false else true
- !! produces boolean

### Bitwise (don't use)

- & | ^ >> >>> <<
- converts to 32 bit signed integer and turn the result back into 64-bit floating point.
- don't use bit hacks in Javascript as it's slower

## statements

- expression
- if
- switch

### Labelled Break:

- statements can have labels
- break statements can refer to those labels

```
loop: for(;;) {
  ...
  if (...) {
    break loop;
  }
  ...
}
```

### for statement for objects

- iterate through all objects

```
for(var name in object) {
  if(object.hasOwnProperty(name)){
    ...
  }
}
```

### Switch statement

- uses '===' for comparison
- the case values can be expressions

```
switch (expression) {
  case ';':
  case ',':
  case '.':
    punctuation();
    break;
  default:
    noneOfTheAbove();
}
```

### Throw Statement

- via constructor

```
throw new Error(reason);
```

- via object literal

```
throw {
  name: exceptionName;
  message: reason
}
```

### Try statement

### with statement :: don't use this it's just confusing

### Function

```
function myFunction(parameters){
  statements;
}
```

### var statement

- defines variables within a function
- types are not specified
- initial values are optional

```
var someVar; // set to undefined
var someVar2 = 'someValue'; // initially
```

### Scope

- In JS, {blocks} do not have scope
- only functions have scope
- var defined in a function are not visible outside of the function

### Return statement


```
return <expression>; <OR>
return;
```
- If there is no *_expression_*, then the return value is undefined
- Except for constructors, whose default return value is this

### Objects

- Everything else is objects
- Objects can contain data and methods
- Objects can inherit from other objects

#### Collections
- An Object is an unordered collection of name/value pairs
- Names are strings
- values are any type, including objects
- Good for representing records and trees
- Every object is a little database

#### Object Literal

- object literals can appear any where a value can appear

```
var myObject = { // wrapped in curly braces

  name : "some value",
  "a string name" : expression
}
```

- new values can added or existing values can be modified or accessed via dot notation or subsscript notation.
- dot notation

```
myObject.name = "changing this value";
```

- subscript notation

```
myObject['a string name'] = {
  name: "Im a string",
  value: "I don't have a value",
};
```

- Object augmentation

```
myObject.newName = "I'm adding a new value through assignment";

```
### Object Literals - Usage

- using objects as function parameters gives flexibility regarding ordering of parameters, setting default values & fallback,  adding/removing parameters in future.

```
myPreDefinedFunction({
  name1: "value1",
  name2: "value2",
  name3: "value3
})
```

```
throw({
  name: "custom error",
  message: "out of bounds"
})
```

### Linkage
- Objects can be created with a secret link to another object
- If an attempt to access a name fails, the secret linked object will be used
- The secret linke is not used when storing. New members are only added to the primary object
- The object(o)  function makes a new empty object with a link to object *_o_*.

### Linkage example

```
var myReferenceObject = {
  name: "Alfred Hitchcock",
  level: "professional",
  occupation: "movie maker"
};

var myNewObject = object(myReferenceObject);

console.log(myNewObject.name);
// returns "Alfred Hitchcock" from the reference object
// myNewObject is linked to the dynamic state of the linked object
// but setting myReferenceObject = null doesn't affect myNewObject as it
// only sets myReferenceObject's reference to null and not the linked value

myNewObject.name = "Edward Elric";
myNewObject.occupation = "Alchemist";
// all these values are changed only in myNewObject
```

## Prototypal Inheritance

- Some languages have classes, methods, constructors and modules. Javascript's function do the work of all of those.
- Instead of Classical Inheritance, javascript has prototypal inheritance.
- It accomplishes the same things but differently.
- It offers greater expressive power.
- Instead of organizing objects into rigid classes, new objects can be made that are similar to existing objects and then customized
- Object customization is a lot less work than making a class and less overhead too.
- one of the keys is the object(o) function.
- the other key is functions.

## Garbage collector

- present in js which is efficient.

## Object Methods

- All objects are linked directly or indirectly to Object.prototype
- All objects inherit some basic methods.
- None of them are very useful.
- *_hasOwnProperty(name)_*
  - is the name a true member of this object?
- No copy method
- No equals method.

## Object construtors

- 3 ways (results are exactly the same)

```
new Object();

{};

object(Object.prototype)
```

- {} is the preferred form

## Object Reference

- Objects can be passed as arguments to functions and can be returned by functions.
  - Objects are passed by reference always.
- The === operator compares object references and not values
  - *_true_* only if both operands are the same object

## Delete

```
delete myObject[name]
```

## Arrays

- Array inherits from Object
- Indexes are converted to strings and used as names for retrieving values.
- Very efficient for sparse Arrays.
- Not very efficient in most other cases.
- One advantage: No need to provide a length or type when creating an array.

### length

- Arrays unlike objects have a special *_length_* member
- It is always 1 larger than the highest subscript
- It allows use of traditional for statement

```
for( var i = 0; i < a.length; i+=1){
  ...
}
```
  - Do not use *_for..in_* with arrays

### Array Literals

- An array literal uses [ ]
- It can contain any number of expressions seperated by commas

```
myList = ['oats', 'peas', 'beans']
```
- New items can be appended

```
myList[myList.length] = 'barley';
// changes the length from 3 to 4
```

- The dot notation should be used with arrays
-  [ ] is preferred to *_new Array()_*

### Array Methods

- concat
- join
- pop
- push
- slice
- sort
- splice
- delete method removes the element but leaves a hole (undefined) in that spot. Doesn't change the length. Use splice instead

### Arrays vs Objects

- use objects when the names are arbitrary strings
- use arrays  when the names are sequential integers
- don't get confused by the term associative array.

### Distinguishing Arrays

- value.constructor === Array
- value instanceof Array
- Neither of these work when the value comes from a different frame

### Arrays and Inheritance

- Don't use arrays as prototypes
  - the objects produced this way doesnot have array nature. It will inherit the array's values and methods but not its *_length_*

- You can augment an individual array.
  - Assign a method to it.
  - This works because arrays are objects.

- You can augment all arrays.
  - Assign methods to Array.prototype

## Functions

- Functions are first-class objects
- Functions can be passed, returned and stored just like any other value
- Functions inherit from *_Object_* and can store name/value pairs.

### function operator

- The function operator takes an optional name, a parameter list and a block of statements and returns a function object.

```
function name(parameters) {
  //statements
}
```

- a function appear in any place where a value is expected

### lambda

- what javascript call *_function_* other languages call lambda.
- It is a source of enormous expressive power.
- unlike most power-constructs, it is secure.

### function statement

- the function statement is just a short-hand for a *_var_* statement with a function value.

```
function foo(){}
```

expands to

```
var foo = function foo() {};
```

### Inner functions

- functions do not all have to be define at the top level ( or left edge).
- functions can be defined inside of other functions.

### function scope

- an inner function has access to the variables and parameters of functions that it is contained within.
- this is known as static scoping or lexical scoping

### closure

- the scope that an inner function enjoys continuew even after the parent functions have returned.
- this is called *_closure_*

### function objects

- functions are objects so they can contain name.
- this can serve the purpose as *_static_* in other languages.

### method

- since functions are values, funcitons can be stored in objects.
- a function in an object is called a method.

### invocation

- if a function is called with too many arguments, the extra arguments are ignored.
- if a function is called with too few arguments, the missing values will be *_undefined_*
- there is no implicit type checking on the arguments
- there are four ways to call a function:

#### Function form

```
functionObject(arguments)
```

*_this_* is set to global object.

This makes it hard to write helper functions inside methods.
To get around and get access to outer this
  var that = this;


#### Method form

  - *_this_* is set to the Object containing the function *_myObject_*
  - this allows method to have reference to the object of interest

```
//method definition
var myObject = {
  that: this, // since inside a normal function this will refer to global object
  methodName: function(args){
    //here this represents thisObject
    ...
  }
};

//calling
myObject.methodName(arguments)
myObject["methodName"](arguments)
```

#### Contructor form

-  When a function is called with the *_new_* operator, a new object is created and assigned to *_this_*
- If there is not an explicit return value, then *_this_* will be returned.

```
new functionObject(arguments)
```

#### Apply Form

```
functionObject.apply(thisObject,[arguments]);
```

#### this

| Invocation form |         this      |
|-----------------|-------------------|
| function        | the global object |
| method          | the object        |
| constructor     | the new object    |

#### arguments

- when a function is invoked, in addition to tis parameters, it also gets a special parameter called *_arguments_*.
- It contins all of the arguments from the invocation.
- It is an array-like object but not an array, so doesn't have access to array methods.
- *_arguments.length_* is the number of arguments passed.
- example
```
function sum() {
  var i,
      n = arguments.length,
      total = 0;
  for (i = 0; i < n; i += 1){
    total += arguments[i];
  }
  return total;
}
```
## Augmenting built-in types

- Object.prototype
- Array.prototype
- Function.prototype
- Number.prototype
- String.prototype
- Boolean.prototype

example 1 :

```
String.prototype.trim = function () {
  return this.replace(/^\s*(\S*(\s+\S+)*)\s*$/, "$1");
};
```

example 2 :

```
var template = '<table border="{border}">' +
  '<tr><th>Last</th><td>{last}</td></tr>' +
  '<tr><th>First</th></td>{first}</td></tr>' +
  '</table>';

var data = {
  first: "Carl",
  last: "Hollywood",
  border: 2
};

mydiv.innerHtml = template.supplant(data);

String.prototype.supplant = function (o) {
  return this.replace(/(([^{}]*))/g,
    function (a,b) {
      var r = o[b];
      return typeof r === 'string' ? r : a;
    }
  );
}
```

##  typeof

- the *_typeof_* prefix operator return a string identifying the type of a value.

| type      |   typeof      |
|-----------|---------------|
|object     | 'object'      |
|function   | 'function'    |
|array      |<span style="color:red">'object'</span>|
|number     | 'number'      |
|string     | 'string'      |
|boolean    | 'boolean'     |
|null       | <span style="color:red">'object'</span>|
|undefined  | 'undefined'   |

## eval ( don't ever use it)

- The *_eval_* function compiles and executes a string and returns the result.
- it is what the browser uses to convert strings into actions.
- it is the most misused feature of the language.
- can use it for json

## Function function

```
new Function(parameters, body)
```
- The *_Function_* constructor takes zero or more parameter name string and body string and uses the JavaScript compiler to produce a function object
- It should only be used to compile fresh source from a server
- It is closely related to *_eval_*.
- *_eval_* uses this Function

## Built-in Type Wrappers

- Java has *_int_* and *_Integer_* two incompatible types which can both carry the same value with differing levels of effiecient and convenience.
- Javascript copied this pattern to no advantage. Avoid it (the following)
- Avoid new Boolean() // creates a boolean object with value. which will always validate to true since it is an object.
- Avoid new String()
- Avoid new Number()

## No object function // confession

```
function object(o) {
  function F() {}
  F.prototype = o;
  return new F();
}
```

## Augmentation

- We can directly modify individual objects to give them just the characteristics we want.
- we can do this without having create classes.
- we can then use our new object as the prototype for lots of new objects, each of which can also be augmented.

## Working with the Grain

- Classical patterns are less effective than prototypal  patterns or parasitic patterns.
- Formal classes are not needed for reuse or extension

## (global) Object

- It is the container for all global variables and all built-in objects.
- Sometimes *_this_* points to it.
```
var global = this;
```
- On browsers, *_window_* is the global object.
  - assigned to the global object is a window member whose value is the global object.
  - so when you say window.something it goes to global object finds window object which points to global itself and knows what to do

### Global variables are evil

- functions within an application can clobber each other.
- cooperating applications can clobber each other.
- use of the global namespace must be minimized.

### Implied Global

- Any *_var_* which is not properly declared is assumed to be global by default.
- This makes it easy for people who do not know or care about encapsulation to be productive but makes applications less reliable.
- JSLint is a tool which helps identify implied globals and other weaknesses.

### Namespace

- Every object is a separate namespace.
- Use an object to organize your variables and functions.
- The *_MYNAMESPACE_*Object.

### Encapsulate

- function scope can create an encapsulation.
- use an anonymous funciton to wrap your application.
- // module pattern

## types

- Trading type-safety for dynamism.
- Javascript has no cast operator.
- Reflection is really easy and usually unnecessary.
- Why we need inheritance ?
  - automatic casting
  - code reuse
- trading brittleness for flexibility

## language features

- Date function
- RegExp

## Threads

- The language definition is neutral on threads
- some language processors (like spidermonkey) provide thread support
- most application environments (like browsers) do not provide it.
- threads are evil

## Code Conventions --> [link](http://javascript.crockford.com/code.html)

### Semicolon

- when the compiler sees an error, it attempts to replace a nearby linefeed with a semicolon and try again.
- this should alarm you.
- it can mask errors.
- always use the full, correct forms, including semicolons.

### Line Ending

- Break a line after a punctuator:
  , . ; : { } ( [ = < > ? ! + - * / ...
- do not break after a name, string, number or ) ] ++ --
- defense against copy/paste errors.

### Comma

- avoid tricky expressions using the comma operators
- do not use extra commas in array literals.
- good [1, 2, 3]
- bad [1, 2, 3,]

### Required Blocks

- Good:

```
if (a) {
  b();
}
```

- Bad:

```
  if (a) b();
```

### Forbidden Blocks

- blocks do not have scope in javascript
- blocks should only be used with structured statements
```
function
if
switch
while
for
do
try
```

### Variables

- define all variables at the beginning of the function
- javascript does not have block scope, so their is no advantage in declaring variables at the place of their first use.

### expression statements

- any expression can be used as a statement. That can mask errors.
- only assignment expressions and invocation expressions should be used as statements
- Good:
```
foo();
```
- Bad:
```
foo && foo();
```

### assignment expressions

- do not use assignment expressions in the condition parts of *_if, while, or for_*
- It is more likely that
```
if (a = b) { ... }
```
- was intended to be
```
if (a == b) { ... }
```

### == and !=

- == and != do type coercion
- Bad
```
if (a == null) { ... }
```
- Good
```
if (a === null) { ... }
if (!a) { ... } // check for falsy values
```

## Use JSLint
