# 3 day lecture by douglas crockford

## Programming style and brain

## Two systems of thinking

- head (analytical thinking - slow - tends to turned off most of the time - slow)
- gut (intuition - error prone)

## Visual Processing

- Tricking the brain with illusions.
  - used by advertising industries to make us buy stuff which we don't need
    - Tobacco industries

## Computer Programming

- most complicated things people make
- initial mission of AI was to make computers write their programs.
- Programming languages are the tools for writing programs.
- program - it should be perfect.
  - we have tests for imperfection but no way to test for perfection

## Hunters and Gatherers

- Our brains have not evolved since the last ice age
- we were not prepared for Computer Programming.
- Programming uses both the head and the gut system.
  - but we have figured it out how to do it but not well enough to convert our understanding to instructions for some one else. this is why we are unable to make AIs write programs for us
  - programming - it's based of the gut intuition and some analytical thinking

## JavaScript
has both
- good parts
- bad parts ( jslint - warns you )
- programmers are emotional about the way they code.

## curly braces left or right ?

- language designed for beginner - interpreter automatically inserts semicolons at line end to make it easier.
- right is better in JavaScript

```
// left - SILENT ERROR
return //semicolon insertion
{
  ok: false
};

// right - works well in js
return {
  ok: true
};
```

## switch statement

- fall through hazard - interpreted as good part initially but was a bad idea as it couples all cases
  - it goes to next case if break is not present

## Coding style

- reduces ERROR
  - eg: THEROMANLATINLETTERSWEREINITIALLYLIKETHIS
- The Elements of style by William Strunk
- [crockford's style](http://www.crockford.com/wrrrld/style.html)
- use elements of good composition where applicable
  - eg: space after comma instead of before it
- No space between a function name and (.
- One space between all other names and (.
- Wrong:

```
foo (bar);
return(a+b);
if(a=== 0) {…}
function foo (b) {…}
function(x) {…}
```

## IIFE's

- means - immediately invocable function expressions

```
function () {
    ...
}();    // Syntax error!
```

- wrap around the function

```
(function () {
    ...
}());
```

## with statement - (Don't Use)

- causes confusion which creates bugs

## == vs ===

- refer [notes 1](1.md)

> If there is a feature of a language that is sometimes problematic, and if it can be replaced with another feature that is more reliable, then always use the more reliable feature.

- use triple equal instead of double equal

> Avoid forms that are difficult to distinguish from common errors.

- like the multiline strings.
  - eg. a space after \ would be undetectable

## Scope (Block scope  v  function scope.)

- js is function scoped

### var statement

- It gets split into two parts:
- The declaration part gets hoisted to the top of the function, initializing with undefined.
- The initialization part turns into an ordinary assignment. So

```
function foo() {
    ...
    var myVar = 0, myOtherVar;
```
Expands into

```
function foo() {
    var myVar = undefined,
        myOtherVar = undefined;
    ...
    myVar = 0;
```

> Declare all variables at the top of the function.

> Declare all functions before you call them.

```
// move var declaration of i to the top.
// remember - the language is not block scoped
for (var i …) {…}
```

### let is block scoped - for future

## Global variables

- Global variables are evil.
- Avoid global variables.
- When using global variables, be explicit.
  - UPPER_CASE
- Global variables should be as rare as hens teeth and stick out like a sore thumb.

## new prefix

- Forgetting new causes a constructor to clobber global variables without warning.
- Fixed in ES5/strict.
- Constructor functions should be named with InitialCaps
- Nothing else should be named with InitialCaps.

```
var a = b = 0;
\\ what the user would want from above
var a = 0, b = 0;
\\ but what really happens
b = 0;
var a = b;
```
> Write in a way that clearly communicates your intent.

```
if (a) b(); c();
\\ what was intended
if (a) {b(); c();}
\\ what really happens
if (a) {b();} c();
```

> Always use curly braces for if statement

## ++

- was designed for pointer arithmetic but still present in all languages
- results in one liners because of which security errors.
- x += 1 instead of x++

> For no cost, by adopting a more rigorous style, many classes of errors can be automatically avoided.

## Bad Stylists

- Under educated.
- Old school.
- Thrill seeker.
- Exhibitionist.

## Performance

- Performance specific code is usually crufty.
- Clean code is easier to reason about.

>Premature optimization is the root of all evil.  
- Donald Knuth

- Most of the code has a negligible impact on performance. Only optimize the code that is taking the time.
- Algorithm replacement is vastly more effective than code fiddling.

## Thoughts on programming

- Programming is the most complicated thing that humans do.
- Computer programs must be perfect.
- Humans are not good at perfect.
- Designing a programming style demands discipline.
It is not selecting features because they are liked, or pretty, or familiar.

## jslint

- The JSLint style was driven by the need to automatically detect defects.
- Different forms/representations that can hide defects are considered defective.

## Language Subsetting.

> Only a madman would use all of C++.
